[GEP-25] Namespaced Cloud Profiles (#9142)
gardener/gardener: docs/proposals/25-private-cloud-profiles.md

### Goals

- Reduce load on Gardener operators for maintaining `CloudProfile`s
- Possibly reduce the time a team has to wait until a change in a `CloudProfile` is reflected in the landscape.
- Make it so that project-scoped information in the `CloudProfile` is only visible to the relevant project
- Full backward compatibility

### Non-Goals

- Automate the approval process for changes in `CloudProfile`s
- Add different, possibly unsupported Kubernetes versions or machine image versions and names

## Proposal

It is proposed to implement a solution that enables project administrators to create custom (private) `CloudProfile`s. These `CloudProfile`s would be consumed by project users of the project they were created in.

### Approach

> First of all, a new, namespaced API object `PrivateCloudProfile` is defined. Its type definition is very similar to the `CloudProfile` object, but omits the following fields:

Reviewer: ...omits the following fields: ...?

Author: Leftover from previous iteration, removed in https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9142/commits/6337abc8aa1851595bd631b58b9b2f6ce3f4375e.

The general approach is that a `PrivateCloudProfile` inherits from a `CloudProfile` using a `parent` field. Fields such as `machineTypes`, `volumeTypes` and `caBundle` are going to be merged with the parent `CloudProfile`. However, a restriction needs to be defined so that the `kubernetes` and `machineImages` fields in a `PrivateCloudProfile` may only be adjusted by a Gardener operator to reduce the chance of a team staying on an unsupported Kubernetes version. A similar problem is already solved in Gardener using custom RBAC verbs [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/plugin/pkg/global/customverbauthorizer), see [custom RBAC verb section](#custom-rbac-verb) for more information.

> Currently, the shoot's reference to a `CloudProfile` is immutable. This validation will be relaxed to allow updating to a `PrivateCloudProfile` whose parent is the same as the currently configured `CloudProfile`. The change will also be reversible, i.e. switching from `PrivateCloudProfile` to `CloudProfile`.

Reviewer: Let's assume for a moment a totally independent on-prem managed infrastructure like OpenStack or vSphere. It makes little/no sense to inherit from any of our current cloud profiles. Let's assume bare metal / manual provisioning. Here, it makes even less sense to inherit from any of our current cloud profiles. What's our play then?

Maybe introducing a minimal cluster-scoped root cloud profile from which to inherit, so that we can at least control the Kubernetes versions, which we actually have to control because those are built-in into Gardener? This cluster-scoped root cloud profile could then also become the parent for the existing cluster-scoped cloud profiles, if we allow multi-level inheritance (deduplicating the Kubernetes versions, which should probably never have been duplicated into the cluster-scoped cloud profiles in the first place).

Reviewer 2: Still defined out of scope for now. However, the proposal was adjusted to potentially cover this use-case in the future.

rules:
  - apiGroups: [""]
    resources: ["privatecloudprofile"]
    verbs: ["modify-spec-kubernetes", "modify-spec-machineImages"]
```

### Automated removal of outdated Kubernetes versions and machine image versions

Expired Kubernetes versions in `CloudProfile`s are currently being removed manually. This is not an issue since there is a very limited amount of `CloudProfile`s. However, if any project administrator is allowed to create a `PrivateCloudProfile` that can then have its Kubernetes versions expiration dates extended, it could become a very cumbersome process to manually remove all the expired Kubernetes versions. One possible solution is to implement a custom controller managed by `gardener-controller-manager`, that reconciles `PrivateCloudProfile`s (and possibly even regular `CloudProfile`s) and removes any Kubernetes versions that are past their expiration date. The same could be done for machine image versions.

However, a problem arises as the Kubernetes/machine image versions are referenced in the `providerConfig` and would therefore need to be removed manually anyway. Because of that, this feature is not part of this GEP.

### Cross-project sharing

> A use case could be defined where a `PrivateCloudProfile` might want to be shared across multiple projects and not just be used within the project it was created in. However, this use case seems to be very slim so this functionality will not be implemented as of now. However, when taking a broader view of Private Seeds and Cloud in Country, this feature is going to be necessary at some point. Still, it is not planned to be implemented as part of this GEP.

Reviewer: I do not believe we have sufficient data to consider this use case "very slim". Where is the data coming from?

If we argue, without data, then let me do that as well: The whole use case of private cloud profiles is probably slim, but because we have a single level project hierarchy (no hierarchy) people share credentials, members, and configuration (in fact, that could be even proven or disproven).

This, forcing people to copy everything between accounts (in our case projects) was/is the biggest UX problem for a major platform I am not naming here.

Author: Clarified in private discussion.

### Multi-Level inheritance

Theoretically, a `PrivateCloudProfile` could inherit from a `CloudProfile` that already inherits from a `CloudProfile`. However, this should probably not be allowed since it presents some major challenges.

1. The rendering process would need to be recursive
2. The `parent` field becomes more complex because it could point to a `CloudProfile` or a `PrivateCloudProfile`

> Because of this, multi-level inheritance will not be implemented as of this GEP.

Reviewer: I still consider this an unreasonable and needless limitation. I do not understand since when "recursive" is a challenge for developers or why it should be "complex" to specify a cluster- or namespace-scoped cloud profile.

Author: Clarified in private discussion.

> ---

Reviewer 3: Nit: you could add the GEP to the index. See https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9170

Author: Done, thanks.

title: Private Cloud Profiles
gep-number: 25
creation-date: 2024-02-08
status: implementable
authors:
- "@benedictweis"
- "@timuthy"
reviewers:
- "@rfranzke"
- "@ScheererJ"
---

# GEP-25: Private Cloud Profiles

## Table of Contents

- [GEP-25: Private Cloud Profiles](#gep-25-private-cloud-profiles)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Summary](#summary)
  - [Motivation](#motivation)
    - [Context](#context)
    - [Current State](#current-state)
    - [Goals](#goals)
    - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
  - [Proposal](#proposal)
    - [Approach](#approach)
    - [Manifest](#manifest)
    - [Rendering](#rendering)
    - [Custom RBAC verb](#custom-rbac-verb)
    - [Automated removal of outdated Kubernetes versions and machine image versions](#automated-removal-of-outdated-kubernetes-versions-and-machine-image-versions)
    - [Cross-project sharing](#cross-project-sharing)
    - [Multi-Level inheritance](#multi-level-inheritance)
  - [Alternatives](#alternatives)
    - [Arbitrary Value Fields](#arbitrary-value-fields)
    - [Private Cloud Profiles by Selection](#private-cloud-profiles-by-selection)

## Summary

> Cloud profiles are currently non-namespaced objects that are configured centrally and consumed by any end user creating a shoot in the landscape. However, some projects require lots of special entries in a cloud profile which adds unnecessary bulk to the cloud profile, as there are lots of entries in it, that are only relevant to one project. Additionally, is usually updated in a certain time interval which means that might projects have to wait several days or even weeks before they can use the changed cloud profile.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[CloudProfiles](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/concepts/apiserver.md#cloudprofiles) are non-namespaced objects that are managed centrally by Gardener operators. They usually don't only contain global configuration, but options that are relevant to certain projects only (e.g. special machine types). This increases the operation burden for operators and clutters `CloudProfile` objects. On the other hand, users are blocked until the requested special configuration is rolled out to the desired landscapes.
```

> This GEP proposes a mechanism that will allow project administrators to create private cloud profiles that are only visible to and can only be consumed by the project they were created in.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This GEP proposes a mechanism that allows project administrators to create private cloud profiles which are only visible in the project they are belonging to.
```

## Motivation

### Context

> Cloud profiles are an integral component of Gardener for managing shoot resources. They are currently managed centrally by Gardener and can be consumed by any Gardener user. However, some teams require frequent changes to a cloud profile. There are a few reasons why:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`CloudProfile`s are an integral component of Gardener for managing shoot clusters. They are currently managed centrally by Gardener operators and can be consumed by any Gardener user. However, some teams require frequent changes to a cloud profile, mainly for the following reasons:
```

1. Testing with different machine types than the ones present in the cloud profile.

> 2. Needing to use different volume types than the ones present in the cloud profile.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
2. Need to use different volume types than the ones present in the cloud profile.
```

> 3. Extending the expiration date of Kubernetes versions. Teams might need to hang on to an older version of Kubernetes as they might not be ready for an upgrade as of the set expiration date. Given that the cloud profile is a cluster-scoped resource, it is currently not possible to extend the expiration date for shoots in one project but only centrally for all projects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Extending the expiration date of Kubernetes versions. Given that the `CloudProfile` is a cluster-scoped resource, it is currently not possible to extend the expiration date for shoots in one project but only centrally for all projects.
```

4. Extending the expiration date for machine images. For the same reasons as extending the expiration date of the Kubernetes versions.

> 5. Some gardener users might have access to custom cloud provider regions that others do not have access to, they currently have no way of using custom cloud provider regions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Some gardener users might have access to custom cloud provider regions that others do not have access to. They currently have no way of using custom cloud provider regions.
```

### Current State

> Cloud Profiles are non-namespaced resources. This means that in a typical gardener installation, only a handful of cloud profiles (i.e. one per cloud provider) exist. They can be consumed by any project's clusters. Consequently, when a project requires changes to cloud profiles for any of the reasons mentioned in the [context section](#context), they are changed for the entire gardener landscape. Since some projects might require frequent changes to a cloud profile, this become quite a cumbersome process. Additionally, it adds confusion to every project's workflow if say for example a team requires an extension of the expiration date of a Kubernetes version since they will be wondering why it was extended.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`CloudProfile`s are non-namespaced resources. This means that in a typical Gardener installation, only a handful of `CloudProfile`s (typically one per cloud provider) exist. They can be consumed by any shoot cluster. Consequently, when a project requires changes to `CloudProfile`s for any of the reasons mentioned in the [context section](#context), they are changed for the entire Gardener landscape. Since some projects might require frequent changes, this become quite a cumbersome process on both, the operators' and users' sides.
```

### Goals

- Reduce load on Gardener operators for maintaining cloud profiles

> - Possibly reduce the time a team has to wait until a change in a cloud profile is reflected in production

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Possibly reduce the time a team has to wait until a change in a `CloudProfile` is reflected in the landscape.
```

- Make it so that project-scoped information in the cloud profile is only visible to the relevant project
- Full backward compatibility

### Non-Goals

> - Automate approval process for changes in Gardeners cloud profiles

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Automate approval process for changes in `CloudProfile`s
```

- Add different, possibly unsupported Kubernetes versions or machine image versions and names

## Proposal

It is proposed to implement a solution that enables project administrators to create custom (private) cloud profiles. These cloud profiles would be consumed by project users of the project they were created in.

> ### Approach

Reviewer 2: After re-iterating over `CloudProfile`s of known providers, I think leaving out the `providerConfig` will restrict this feature massively but even worse, `PrivateCloudProfile`s create an impression that a configuration of fields like `regions` and `machineImages` just work, but most of the time additional configuration is required.

Examples:
1. To enable a new region in AWS, it's required to configure AMI(s) in `providerConfig`.
2. To enable a new region in OpenStack, floating pools and images must be maintained in `providerConfig`.
3. To extend an expiration date of an OS in GCP, Gardener Operators must not remove the image in `providerConfig`. 

I think we should evaluate supporting `providerConfig`:
- By default, the PrivateCloudProfile-Controller will just consider the parent `providerConfig` when it writes the merged profile to `.status`.
- Provider extensions can optionally register a webhook that is capable of merging the `providerConfig` portion  as intended.

Any opinions @rfranzke?

Reviewer 5: I am not against it, just voted to not look at it right now to avoid the additional complexity to build this webhook for all provider extensions. Feel free to include and implement this if you want to enable such use cases.

> First of all, a new, namespaced API object is defined, the `PrivateCloudProfile`. Its type definition is very similar to the `CloudProfile` object but it omits the `type`, `providerConfig` and `seedSelector` fields. The `type` field is omitted as it is inherited from the parent cloud profile. The `providerConfig` field is omitted as gardener itself does not know anything about the structure of this field and cannot merge it accordingly. The `seedSelector` field is omitted as it is too complex for this GEP but may be added in the future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First of all, a new, namespaced API object `PrivateCloudProfile` is defined. Its type definition is very similar to the `CloudProfile` object, but omits the followings fields:
```

Create a list for a better overview.

> The general approach is that a private cloud profile inherits from a cloud profile using a `parent` field in the private cloud profile and should therefore not change the type or provider config. Fields such as `machineTypes`, `volumeTypes`, `regions` and `caBundle` are going to be merged with the parent cloud profile. However, a restriction need to be defined so that the `kubernetes` and `machineImages` fields in a private cloud profile may only be adjusted by a gardener operator to reduce the chance of a team staying on an unsupported kubernetes version. A similar problem is already solved in gardener using custom rbac verbs [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/plugin/pkg/global/customverbauthorizer), the approach is described in more detail in the [custom rbac verb section](#custom-rbac-verb).

Reviewer: Ha, nice that you want to support even this use case (extend the lifetime for a version for a project, but not for everybody - under control of the Gardener operators), but if that's too much effort, it can be discussed. The idea is great, though. The use case definitely exists.

Author: Thanks, glad to hear that the use case is valid.

> The general approach is that a private cloud profile inherits from a cloud profile using a `parent` field in the private cloud profile and should therefore not change the type or provider config. Fields such as `machineTypes`, `volumeTypes`, `regions` and `caBundle` are going to be merged with the parent cloud profile. However, a restriction need to be defined so that the `kubernetes` and `machineImages` fields in a private cloud profile may only be adjusted by a gardener operator to reduce the chance of a team staying on an unsupported kubernetes version. A similar problem is already solved in Gardener using custom RBAC verbs [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/plugin/pkg/global/customverbauthorizer), the approach is described in more detail in the [custom RBAC verb section](#custom-rbac-verb).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The general approach is that a `PrivateCloudProfile` inherits from a `CloudProfile` using a `parent` field. Fields such as `machineTypes`, `volumeTypes`, `regions` and `caBundle` are going to be merged with the parent `CloudProfile`. However, a restriction needs to be defined so that the `kubernetes` and `machineImages` fields in a `PrivateCloudProfile` may only be adjusted by a Gardener operator to reduce the chance of a team staying on an unsupported Kubernetes version. A similar problem is already solved in Gardener using custom RBAC verbs [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/plugin/pkg/global/customverbauthorizer), see [custom RBAC verb section](#custom-rbac-verb) for more information.
```

> The general approach is that a private cloud profile inherits from a cloud profile using a `parent` field in the private cloud profile and should therefore not change the type or provider config. Fields such as `machineTypes`, `volumeTypes`, `regions` and `caBundle` are going to be merged with the parent cloud profile. However, a restriction need to be defined so that the `kubernetes` and `machineImages` fields in a private cloud profile may only be adjusted by a gardener operator to reduce the chance of a team staying on an unsupported kubernetes version. A similar problem is already solved in Gardener using custom RBAC verbs [here](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/plugin/pkg/global/customverbauthorizer), the approach is described in more detail in the [custom RBAC verb section](#custom-rbac-verb).

Reviewer 4: I have few concerns about supporting old Kubernetes version- 
- How dropping support for old Kubernetes version will look like, once the kubernetes version support is dropped, shoot of that Kubernetes version will not work.
- How long/extra do we have to wait to drop support of old Kubernetes version, user can ask to extend the life of Kubernetes version for 6 months/1 year, will gardener have to wait for it?
- In case of old Kubernetes support is removed from gardener, and the private cloud profile still has old Kubernetes, will we upgrade all shoot forcefully and remove old Kubernetes version from private cloud profile?

If above is the case, how it will be different from the current approach?

Author: I have been made aware that some teams are not immediately ready to upgrade to the next version of Kubernetes when the expiration date is due. Therefore, I think, we currently have to extend the expiration date in the cloud profile leaving every project open to using the "outdated, but extended" version. With private cloud profiles we could extend the expiration date on a project level and then figure with the projects team how long the preparation for the next version will take them. However, enabling this extended expiration date of a Kubernetes version should be the exception not the norm. Once all the extended Kubernetes versions have expired, Gardener can drop support for that version. It differs from our current approach in that it can be done on a project basis and not for all projects. Is that what you were asking about?

Author: In general, handling Kubernetes version updates is not part of this GEP and not related to private cloud profiles. The only thing that would change with private cloud profiles is that the Kubernetes version could be extended on a per project basis. But a new upgrade strategy will not be introduced as of this GEP.

Reviewer 4: >With private cloud profiles we could extend the expiration date on a project level and then figure with the projects team how long the preparation for the next version will take them. However, enabling this extended expiration date of a Kubernetes version should be the exception not the norm. Once all the extended Kubernetes versions have expired, Gardener can drop support for that version.

It seems more work to me than what is being done currently. 
Current scenario - 
- Operator communicates with teams to extend the lifetime of the Kubernetes version.
- Operator can manage one place stuff like how long a certain Kubernetes version's life should be increased and expire the version accordingly.

New scenario(this GEP) - 
- Operator communicates with teams to extend the lifetime of the Kubernetes version.
- Accordingly, add the Kubernetes version in the respective private cloudprofiles and remove it from the main CloudProfile.
- This may be required to be done for multiple projects.
- Then manage all private cloudprofiles to remove the old Kubernetes version. (Again, it can be multiple cloudprofiles).

Overall more work is required than what is being done today with little to no benefit.

Reviewer 4: With the new case, some teams who would not have needed PrivateCludprofile will create it only for using the old Kubernetes version.

Reviewer 2: Extending the lifetime of a Kubernetes version will still be a very exceptional use-case that is under the control of operators. If they don't want to offer it, they won't do it.

The **new scenario** that you described will not be the default approach, it is still intended that Kubernetes versions expire globally. With `PrivateCloudProfile`s, operators just get the additional **option** to extend the expiration selectively.

Reviewer 4: In an ad-hoc internal discussion with @timuthy @benedictweis @hendrikKahl and @dguendisch, we decide that it's better to have this feature.

> Currently, a shoot's reference to a cloud profile is immutable. When enabling private cloud profiles, it is necessary to allow a change to the cloud profile reference. Although it is very important to only allow a change to a private cloud profile that uses the shoot's current cloud profile as a parent. Additionally, the change may go in the other direction, changing from a private cloud profile to the private cloud profile's parent cloud profile.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, the shoot's reference to a `CloudProfile` is immutable. This validation will be relaxed to allow updating to a `PrivateCloudProfile` whose parent is the same as the currently configured `CloudProfile`. The change will also be reversible, i.e. switching from `PrivateCloudProfile` to `CloudProfile`.

### Manifest

> A private cloud profile could look like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A `PrivateCloudProfile` could look like this:
```

```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: PrivateCloudProfile
metadata:

>   name: private-cloud-profile-xyz

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  name: aws-profile-xyz
```

To match the parent.

  namespace: project-xyz
spec:
  parent: aws-central-cloud-profile
  kubernetes:
    versions:
      - version: 1.28.6
        expirationDate: 2024-06-06T01:02:03Z
  machineImages:
    - name: suse-chost
      versions:
        - version: 16.4
          expirationDate: 2023-08-8T23:59:59Z
  machineTypes: 
    - name: m5.xlarge
      cpu: "8"
      gpu: "0"
      memory: 16Gi
  volumeTypes:
    - name: ab6
      class: premium
      usable: true
  regions:
    - name: europe-special
      zones:
        - name: europe-custom-1a
        - name: europe-custom-1b
        - name: europe-custom-1c
```

### Rendering

> Since Gardener is designed around using the `CloudProfile` object for managing infrastructure details for a shoot, the private cloud profile has to be rendered so that a `CloudProfile` object is emitted. This rendered cloud profile will be written to the status of the `PrivateCloudProfile` object.

Reviewer 4: Will the rendered cloud profile have all the data of the parent cloud profile? In that case, can we breach the object size limit which is I guess 1.5 MB?

Author: Yes it is planned that the rendered cloud profiles has all the data of the parent cloud profile, so the object size limit could be problematic. Another approach is to render the cloud profile every time it needs to be accessed but this seems like a lot of overhead.

Author: After further consideration, we concluded that the object size limit will simply not be taken into consideration until it becomes problematic. If customers start defining very large private cloud profiles, a solution such as splitting the cloud profile into multiple resources or compressing it in any way could be implemented. But maybe you have an idea on how to circumvent the object size limit in any way?

Suppose we have a simplified cloud profile that looks like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: CloudProfile
metadata:
  name: aws-central-cloud-profile
spec:
  type: aws
  kubernetes:
    versions:
      - version: 1.27.1
      - version: 1.26.3
      - version: 1.25.8
      - version: 1.24.6
      - version: 1.28.6
        expirationDate: 2023-02-02T01:02:03Z
  machineImages:
    - name: suse-chost
      versions:
        - version: 15.4
        - version: 14.4
        - version: 13.6
  machineTypes: 
    - name: m5.large
      cpu: "4"
      gpu: "0"
      memory: 8Gi
  volumeTypes:
    - name: gp3
      class: standard
      usable: true
  regions:
    - name: europe-central-1
      zones:
        - name: europe-central-1a
        - name: europe-central-1b
        - name: europe-central-1c
```

and a private cloud profile from the [manifest section](#manifest).

After the rendering is done, the private cloud profile will look like this:

```yaml
apiVersion: core.gardener.cloud/v1beta1
kind: PrivateCloudProfile
metadata:

>   name: private-cloud-profile-xyz

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  name:  aws-profile-xyz
```

    spec:
      type: aws
      kubernetes:
        versions:
          - version: 1.27.1
          - version: 1.26.3
          - version: 1.25.8
          - version: 1.24.6
          - version: 1.28.6
            expirationDate: 2024-06-06T01:02:03Z
      machineImages:
        - name: suse-chost
          versions:
            - version: 16.4
              expirationDate: 2023-08-8T23:59:59Z
            - version: 15.4
            - version: 14.4
            - version: 13.6
      machineTypes: 
        - name: m5.large
          cpu: "4"
          gpu: "0"
          memory: 8Gi
        - name: m5.xlarge
          cpu: "8"
          gpu: "0"
          memory: 16Gi
      volumeTypes:
        - name: ab6
          class: premium
          usable: true
        - name: gp3
          class: standard
          usable: true
      regions:
        - name: europe-central-1
          zones:
            - name: europe-central-1a
            - name: europe-central-1b
            - name: europe-central-1c
        - name: europe-special
          zones:
            - name: europe-custom-1a
            - name: europe-custom-1b
            - name: europe-custom-1c
```

> The rendering is done by a new custom controller registered to the `gardener-controller-manager`. Merge conflicts can not arise during the merge process as they are caught by static validation and an admission plugin for validating the private cloud profile.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The rendering is done by a new custom controller registered to the `gardener-controller-manager`. Merge conflicts can not arise during the merge process as they are caught by static validation and an admission plugin for validating the `PrivateCloudProfile` object.
```

> The rendering is done by a new custom controller registered to the `gardener-controller-manager`. It a merge conflict is to appear during the rendering process, it should be noted somewhere in the status and the parent cloud profile should be preferred.

Reviewer: Which negative consequences might this defaulting have (you have a running productive cluster, you change the private cloud profile, make a mistake, and then the default cloud profile becomes active)? Isn't that absolutely disastrous? My gut feeling is, we cannot do that. What happens today btw. if the cloud profile is broken with already existing clusters using it? I would expect that reconciliation fails or whatever, but basically that nothing (bad) happens then (it's stuck until the mistake is rectified).

P.S.: Typo:

```suggestion
The rendering is done by a new custom controller registered to the `gardener-controller-manager`. If a merge conflict is to appear during the rendering process, it should be noted somewhere in the status and the parent cloud profile should be preferred.
```

Author: Clarified as of https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9142/commits/0a315107b5884c4f85da8b0339ada1bd030d3cfc.

### Custom RBAC verb

To prevent users from entering arbitrary values in the `kubernetes` and `machineImages` fields, two custom RBAC verbs may be introduced. It can then be checked if the user that is creating or updating the `kubernetes` or `machineImages` field is authorized to do so.

```yaml
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1
kind: ClusterRole
metadata:
  name: privatecloudprofile-modify-special-fields
rules:
  - apiGroups: [""]
    resources: ["privatecloudprofile"]
    verbs: ["modify-spec-kubernetes", "modify-spec-machineImages"]
```

### Automated removal of outdated Kubernetes versions and machine image versions

> Expired Kubernetes versions in cloud profiles are currently being removed manually. This is not an issue since there is a very limited amount of cloud profiles. However, if any project administrator is allowed to create a private cloud profile that can then have its Kubernetes versions expiration dates extended, it cloud become a very cumbersome process to manually remove all the expired Kubernetes versions. It is therefore proposed to implement a custom controller managed by `gardener-controller-manager`, that reconciles private cloud profiles (and possibly even regular cloud profiles) and removes any Kubernetes versions that are past their expiration date. The same could be done for machine image versions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Expired Kubernetes versions in cloud profiles are currently being removed manually. This is not an issue since there is a very limited amount of cloud profiles. However, if any project administrator is allowed to create a private cloud profile that can then have its Kubernetes versions expiration dates extended, it could become a very cumbersome process to manually remove all the expired Kubernetes versions. It is therefore proposed to implement a custom controller managed by `gardener-controller-manager`, that reconciles private cloud profiles (and possibly even regular cloud profiles) and removes any Kubernetes versions that are past their expiration date. The same could be done for machine image versions.
```

> However, a problem arises as the Kubernetes/machine image versions are referenced in the `providerConfig` and would therefore need to be removed manually anyway.

Reviewer 2: Hm, the first section sounds like you want to remove the outdated information and the second one reveals a problem. It doesn't really clarify what is going to be done ...

Author: I see what you mean. This was probably leftover from some discussions. Clarified as of https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9142/commits/a2e1c7748df738d9204b570dd554bd5337375627.

### Cross-project sharing

> A use case could be defined where a private cloud profile might want to be shared across multiple projects and not just be used within the project it was created id. However, this use case seems to be very slim so this functionality will not be implemented as of now. However, when taking a broader view of Private Seeds and Cloud in Country, this feature is going to be necessary at some point. Still, it is not planned to be implemented as of this GEP.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A use case could be defined where a private cloud profile might want to be shared across multiple projects and not just be used within the project it was created in. However, this use case seems to be very slim so this functionality will not be implemented as of now. However, when taking a broader view of Private Seeds and Cloud in Country, this feature is going to be necessary at some point. Still, it is not planned to be implemented as part of this GEP.
```

> A use case could be defined where a private cloud profile might want to shared across multiple projects and not just be used within the project it was created id. However this use case seems to be very slim so this functionality will not be implemented as of now. Although, when taking a broader view with Private Seeds and Cloud in Country, this feature is going to be necessary at some point. Still, is is not planned to be implemented as of this GEP.

Reviewer: OK, that's somewhat sad, because we have quite many teams that have created multiple projects. They will definitely like to share their cloud profiles. In some cases, they can use automation (copying the same private cloud profile to all projects), but it's not always possible, e.g. if individual developers use their individual projects.

One can also discuss why this is the case. In my view, because we have a flat hierarchy. No org/folder structure above allows to bind together certain project aspects like `OpenIDConnectPresets` or not `PrivateCloudProfiles`. That could later be a possible solution - maybe?

P.S.: Various grammar and typing mistakes. Use a proof-reader resp. spelling/grammar checking tool. GPTs are also quite good at it.

Author: I know that the cross-project sharing aspect would be quite valuable. However for now, we chose to not include it in this GEP due to complexity. If an org like structure is introduced, perhaps by @tobschli 's work, it could certainly be a solution to this problem. 

Also grammar and spelling should hopefully be fixed now.

### Multi-inheritance

> Theoretically, a private cloud profile could inherit from a cloud profile that already inherits from a cloud profile. However, this should probably not be allowed since it presents some major challenges.

Reviewer: Hmm... this is not multi-inheritance (btw, typo, hyphenated compounds in headline titles must be capitalised unless they are articles and the like). Multi-inheritance would be to inherit from 2 different parents.

What you mean is multi-level inheritance.

Author: Indeed, renamed in https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9142/commits/3a14677e49ca8175998aab36e32eda74300a1407

> 1. The rendering process now has to merge multiple instead of two objects

Reviewer: This again sounds like multi-inheritance, so what exactly do you mean?

Author: Multi-level inheritance is meant. Will be clarified in the GEP.

> 2. The parent field becomes more complex because it could point to a cloud profile or to a private cloud profile.

Reviewer: This again sounds like multi-level inheritance. Why is that a problem? I don't see why this is bad (yet).

Multi-inheritance is bad, multi-level inheritance doesn't feel bad to me (yet).

Author: Multi-level inheritance was excluded from this GEP because the rendering process would then have to be recursive. Also in the case of a merge conflict, it is not as easy to determine which cloud profile should populate the  field where the conflict appears.

Author: From my perspective, the biggest problem with multi-level inheritance is that the reconcile order of the (private) cloud profiles is now critical for correct rendering of the private cloud profiles. A change to a private cloud profile that both inherits and is inherited would need to communicate its change. Multi-level inheritance could however be implemented, but it is not planned as of this GEP as the development effort to implement it is, from my perspective, too high for the use case defined.

Reviewer: Last seen revision? And since when is "recursive" a problem for developers?

Author: Clarified in private discussion.

Because of this, multi-inheritance will not be supported as of this GEP.

## Alternatives

### Arbitrary Value Fields

> Instead of specifying a private cloud profile resource, an end user could be allowed to enter arbitrary names in fields such as `machineTypes`. The entry would then, if the user enters a wrong value, throw an error when provisioning the resource at the cloud provider. However, this approach does not seam feasible as the metadata that is specified in a cloud profile like amount of cpus and ram is used in the trail clusters to validate quotas. Therefore, an exception would need to be developed for this specific, and possible other, use cases.

Reviewer: The quantities are used not only for trial clusters (typo, you wrote trail), but also for scale-from-zero if I am not mistaken (cc @rishabh-11).

Author: Typo fixed. If you wish, the scale-from-zero use case will be added to clarify the need for the metadata.

Author: Added the use case in https://github.com/gardener/gardener/pull/9142/commits/0a315107b5884c4f85da8b0339ada1bd030d3cfc.

> Instead of specifying a private cloud profile resource, an end user could be allowed to enter arbitrary names in fields such as `machineTypes`. The entry would then, if the user enters a wrong value, throw an error when provisioning the resource at the cloud provider. However, this approach does not seem feasible as the metadata that is specified in a cloud profile like the number of CPUs and amount of RAM is used in the trial clusters to validate quotas and to enable the scale-from-zero feature. Therefore, an exception would need to be developed for this specific, and possibly other, use cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead of specifying a private cloud profile resource, an end user could be allowed to enter arbitrary names in fields such as `machineTypes`. The entry would then, if the user enters a wrong value, throw an error when provisioning the resource at the cloud provider. However, this approach does not seem feasible as the metadata that is specified in a cloud profile like the number of CPUs and amount of RAM is used in the trial clusters (see [Shoot Qutas](https://github.com/gardener/gardener/blob/master/docs/concepts/apiserver.md#shoot-quotas)) to validate quotas and to enable the scale-from-zero feature. Therefore, an exception would need to be developed for this specific, and possibly other, use cases.
```
